Pulmonary embolism is a life-threatening
condition where a blood clot,
usually from a deep vein thrombosis in the
legs, travels
to the pulmonary arteries and blocks blood
flow to part of the lung.
This creates a critical
ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
Ventilation may be normal, but perfusion
is reduced or absent,
resulting in dead space ventilation and
impaired gas exchange.
From an RT perspective, the key is
recognizing the pattern.
Patients often present with sudden-onset
dyspnea, tachycardia,
and unexplained hypoxemia.
You may also see tachycardia, chest pain,
especially pleuritic, and sometimes
hemoptysis.
Breath sounds can be normal, which is a
major clue.
If a patient is hypoxic but lungs sound
clear, you
should immediately think about pulmonary
embolism.
Pathophysiologically, the clot increases
pulmonary vascular resistance,
which can strain the right ventricle.
As pressure builds, right heart failure
can develop,
reducing cardiac output and worsening
oxygen delivery.
This is why large or massive PEs can
rapidly become hemodynamically unstable.
Diagnostics often begin with clinical
suspicion.
You may see a low PaO2 and lower normal
PaCO2 early due to hyperventilation.
D-dimer can support the possibility of
clot formation, but
CT pulmonary andiography is the gold
standard for diagnosis.
Ventilation-perfusion scans may also be
used when CT is contraindicated.
Management depends on severity.
Oxygen is used to treat hypoxemia, but
remember,
it does not fix the underlying perfusion
problem.
Anticryoglation is the cornerstone of
treatment to prevent further clot formation.
In more severe cases, thrombolytics may be
used to break
down the clot, and in extreme situations,
surgical or catheter-based interventions
may be required.
Red flags you must recognize include
sudden hypotension, signs of
shock, altered mental status, or worsening
hypoxemia despite oxygen therapy.
These suggest a massive PE and require
immediate escalation.
As a respiratory therapist, your role is
critical.
You assess oxygenation, monitor for signs
of right heart strain,
evaluate ABG trends, and recognize when a
patient is deteriorating.
You are often the first to identify that
something doesn't fit the typical respiratory
pattern.
For board prep, remember this.
Pulmonary embolism is a perfusion problem,
not a ventilation problem.
Think sudden dyspnea, clear lungs,
hypoxemia,
and risk factors like immobility or recent
surgery.
Early recognition can save a life.